He could look at the weather map and say, it's going
to stop raining at 1215. We can go for a picnic. We
have to be back by 315, because the rain's going to
start again. And he was always right within 15
minutes. So then, really just incredible.
Another man was a man named Sparrow Petterson, who
later came to this country and became a professor
of meteorology at MIT and president of the
American Meteorological Society. He was a
good first-rate meteorologist, but not really
with the great intuition that Bjerknes had.
Another man was an engineer named Odd Dahl, who'd
been with Sverdrup on the Maud expedition. The
Maud was the thing which really shaped Sverdrup's
life. The Norwegians, ever since the 1890s, when
Nansen tried to do what he did and succeeded in
freezing his ship, the Fram, in the polar ice. He
had the idea that you could drift across the North
Pole. You just got in the right place in the Arctic
Ocean in a ship
or something to live on. And the other great
Norwegian explorer, Amundsen, Roald Amundsen,
had a ship built called the Maud. And they tried
this stunt again in the 1920s,
late 19, just about the end of World War II, going up
to about 1923 or 1924. The ship, they actually
tried this twice, and altogether, it's fair to
have spent seven years frozen in the Arctic.
profound experience. There were only about five
or six of them on the moor, a very, very small crew.
And being Norwegians, they managed to get along
together for this ungodly long time in a terrible,
what seems to me to be terrible, a terrible
situation. They did it by having, by being very
rigorously disciplined.
Sverdrup went off one winter and spent the winter
with the Chukchi.
Eskimo-like people who lived in Siberia, and
wrote a book about it called Post-Chukchi Folket,
with the Chukchi people.
Most of the time, he had a very full program of
observations of all kinds of geophysical
phenomena. And he spent years and years writing up
the results.
He was all over this by the time he came to Scripps,
but he was then working on the results of the
Carnegie, this non-magnetic job that I was
telling you about.
And he really brought science, physical science,
to the Scripps Institution. Vaughan, his
predecessor, was a a paleontologist interested
in corals. And he was the, I guess, the leading
authority on the taxonomy of fossil corals, and
also on the taxonomy of the larger foraminifera,
formed of these big things like the mumulites that
you find in Egypt. And the way he got into
oceanography was by
deciding that in order to understand dead corals,
he had to understand living corals, the ecology of
living corals. He made a famous series of
experiments in which he took little pieces of
coral and stuck them to something like a board or
something like that, and hung them in the water, in
tropical waters, and watched how fast they grew.
Heard that they grow surprisingly fast,
about one centimeter a year or something like
that. And
he always talked about the interrelations
between marine organisms and their environment.
That's what he thought oceanography was. One of
the jobs that oceanographers had was to study
those things. That's something we now call
ecology.
He wasn't very interested in in physiology or
biochemistry, didn't understand biochemistry.
And he didn't really think of marine organisms, as
most biologists do, as simply instruments for
studying biology. He thought that oceanography
should be concerned with, as I said, the ecology of
marine
organisms. In this respect, he was very much like
his predecessor, William E. Ritter, the first
director of the Scripps Institution. Ritter was a
professor of zoology at Berkeley, and he founded
something here in La Jolla called the Scripps
Institution for Biological Research. If you go
down that grade by the Scripps Institution, it's
still called the biological grade. I often
wondered why it was called that, but then I, of
course, found much later that it was simply
because that's where the biological was.
Ritter had exactly the same notion that Vaughan
had, that you had to study whole organisms. He
wrote a famous book called The California
Woodpecker and I, which argued his point of view.
At that time, biology was going in just the
opposite direction. It was going down from the
whole organism to organs and to cells and to
molecules. That's been the history of biology,
really, for the last 70 years or so, 60 years, since
about 1915. And this, of course, has led to a
revolution in biology. But we're just now coming
back to Ritter's idea that one of the important
things that we need to learn about is a very much
more difficult subject than the study of organs,
or cells, or molecules, is the study of the whole
creature, the whole animal, or the whole plant in
relation to other plants and other animals, which
is a major part of their environment. Ecology is a
very important subject, which is
worked on by a completely inadequate group of
people. There's not enough competent people in
that field. And it was because of Ritter's
disgust, really, or vigorous opposition to the
reductionists that the Scripps Institution
changed its name in 1924 from Scripps Institution
for Biological Research to the Scripps
Institution of Oceanography. Well,
it became part of it. He started it by... every
summer for about seven or eight years,
establishing a biological, a biologist's summer
camp somewhere along the California coast. In
those days, every university and every college
tried to have a marine biological camp or station,
because there's such a wonderful variety and
diversity of marine organisms. And he had a summer
camp in various places. He ended up in Coronado.
and interested a man named Fred Baker here in San
Diego in his work. And Baker persuaded him to stay
and to settle here and have a permanent station, or
at least come here year after year in the
summertime. And the last one they had, the last one
of these summer stations they had was at the Cove,
just north of the Valencia Hotel. here in La Jolla.
And then
Ritter became a very good friend of E.W. Scripps,
the newspaper man. Scripps was a monologist. He
talked all the time. And Ritter was one of the very
few people who could talk back to him. And Scripps
was fascinated by this. And he said, I'm not
endowing an institution. I want to endow a man
named Ed Ritter.
Yes, I gave him that.
Scripps managed to con the city of San Diego into
giving or to selling him a Pueblo lot.
He said, San Diego's an old Spanish Pueblo.
It has a great deal of land, which we call the Pueblo
lands of the city of San Diego. And they divided
this up into lots of about 180 acres. La Jolla is on
several, two or three of these lots. And there was
180 acres where the Scripps Institution is now,
which Scripps was able to buy from the city for
$1,000. And
the city wanted, this was a philanthropic, it
wasn't a, It was worth more than $1,000 even then,
of course. But they got it very cheaply in order to
establish this, to build a permanent building
there for the Scripps Institution. And the first
building there was the so-called Scripps
Building, which is still there, built in the early
1900s. And in 1912, the institution became part of
the University of California as the Scripps
Institution for Biological Research. And
Scripps and his sister, Ellen Browning Scripps,
all together gave them an endowment worth about
$500,000 in those days of stock. Most of the stock
was in the Detroit News,
the evening news association. And they still have
that stock. And that used to provide the salary of
the director.
But of course, it's a very small part of the total
income, minuscule part of the total budget now.
So the Scripps Institution, when it became the
Scripps Institution of Oceanography, the name
was changed basically because of Ritter's
feeling that the biologists were going just the
wrong direction.
And it became then the first oceanographic
institution in this country, one of the first in
the world. Not the first in the world, but one of the
early ones. Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution, which is the next
major institution in this country, was started
about 1931, about seven years later after the
Scripps became the oceanographic institution.
Although Woods Hole had had course for many years
something called Marine Biological Laboratory,
which was a summer place for biologists. That's
still an independent entity at Woods Hole. And
they had also had the Bureau of Fisheries,
Fisheries Laboratory at Woods Hole. So they have a
very long tradition of studying the ocean. We had a
man here named Francis B. Sumner, who was brought
here by Ritter Because he had
done some very interesting early work on the color
adaptations of fish to their environment. Fish
that change color when they're, like the halibut
and other flatfish, that change color when they,
or change their patterns and their scales when
they, for different environments. And Sumner
became very much interested in the Lamarckian
idea of proving or disproving the Lamarckian idea
that acquired characteristics are inherited. He
tested this out with mice. And he had thousands of
mice. And there was a mouse house up on top of the
hill just overlooking the present campus. And
when Vaughan came, he made him Sumner always
described that the institution went wet. And
Blond thought that this work on mice was not really
appropriate for an oceanographic institution.
So he made Sumner really stop it after a few years.
And Sumner went back to his fish and did some,
continued to do very interesting things on
adaptations of fish to temperature and to other
environmental factors. really just the kind of
ecology that one thought ought to be done. He's
always quite bitter about having to give up his
experiments on mice. He was a contemporary of
Morgan, a great Drosophila man. And Morgan won the
Nobel Prize, basically because he chose the right
experimental animal, Drosophila, which
reproduce every few years. days or every few
weeks, I guess it is, whereas mice take months. So
Morgan could get a great many more generations
with an experiment than Sumner could. It's an
interesting example of how much of a role luck
plays, or perhaps insight or intuition. Sumner
became a member of the National Academy of
Sciences, long after Morgan had won his Nobel
Prize. Well, I'm sorry I digressed to the early
part of the institution. But coming back to what I
did, or what we did after I became an instructor and
after I came back from Norway,
a man named Francis Shepard appeared here in 1937.
I guess he'd actually been here before that. He'd
been here even while I was a graduate student. He
was very much interested in submarine canyons.
And he got a grant from the Geological Society of
America for $12,000, I think it was, to
study the marine geology off the Southern
California coast.
By that time, we had a new ship.
The old scripts, the one I told you about, had blown
up in the harbor here in San Diego, as it seems to
happen to oceanographic ships. They had an
explosion which killed the cook, this fellow
Frank I was telling you about, and very seriously
injured, murdered Ross. Never really recovered.
This was while we were in, Ellen and I were in
Norway. And so Harold Sparger managed to persuade
Robert P. Scripps, the son of E.W., was then the
editor and publisher of the Scripps-Howard
Papers, to buy him a yacht. He bought Lewis Stone's
yacht, called Serrano, S-E-R-R-A-N-O, and
renamed it the E.W. Scripps. This was a famous
early oceanographic boat in the United States.
It was a top-sail schooner, a Gloster schooner.
They cut off the top mast, but we retained the
regular mast.
And for years, we sailed this ship as well as drove
it under power. Gradually, the mast got shorter,
and the engines got bigger. And after World War II,
it gave up sailing altogether. It was just really a
powerboat. This is in contrast to Woods Hole,
which had a yawl named the Atlantis. It was built
about 1932. And which Columbus Islin, the famous
director of Woods Hole, was the first captain of.
She remained a sailing vessel all during her
career. But we gradually got it. use the sails only
to steady the ship. You could try something to
steady the ship. By that time, we had a
professional crew. We had a captain and several
members of the crew, in addition to the graduate
students who still were also stood watches,
regular sailors watches. But the engine room and
the officers, we had a couple of officers on the
ship. Other
people like that were all professional sailors.
Shepard had brought out with him two graduate
students, Bob Dietz and Kenneth Emery, one of whom
is now a member of the National Academy. The other
is a famous oceanographer and marine geologist
with NOAA, the National Ocean and Atmospheric
Administration. He's one of the primary authors
of the theory of sea floor spreading, Bob Dietz.
And he also brought with him two guys from UCLA,
whose names I can't remember, who had an idea about
building a coring machine. device for taking
cores. I don't think of their names, but I can't
think of
the form of it. They were basically engineers and
very expensive taste. They spent a lot of money on
this damn coring machine. The theory of it was that
you would open a valve and the water would
rush into a chamber, and in the process...
I'm sorry, that's not quite right. You plunged it.
This was a cylinder on top of a core barrel, and
there was a valve between the core barrel and the
cylinder. You opened that valve, and the barrel
would sink into the mud because of the suction
created by this empty cylinder. And essentially,
mud would be sucked up to fill the back room. The
trouble with this device was that the forces were
too great. Something always broke. We spent
thousands of dollars on it. It never really worked
very well. It was about that time that Kuhlenberg
was developing his
really
operated on a very similar principle. And also
when Charles Piggott was developing his gun, the
Piggott gun. And the Piggott gun, in fact, really
worked pretty well. Of course, the Hulenberg
Corridor worked very well indeed. That was much,
the Kuhlenberg Corp really came after World War
II. And we, anyhow, what we, one of the major things
we did was to study the submarine geology off this
coast and the sediments and their distribution.
Then in 1938 or 39, I guess, 39, we had an expedition
to the Gulf of California. That was the longest.
farthest away from home the Scripps Institution
vessel had ever been. And we did all sorts of
things, and we built what the Russians now call a,
what do they call it, essentially a mixed
oceanographic expedition, doing biology and
geology and physical oceanography and chemical
oceanography all at the same time. Was that fairly
unusual? The early oceanographic institutions
didn't do that? Yes, they did, because that was the
way that
all these big expeditions had operated, the
Meteor Expedition, the Challenger Expedition,
and the, well,
there were half a dozen others in the very early
days. The last big expedition, the Snellius
Expedition in the East Indies, all of these big
expeditions conducted everything at once,
basically because ships were so expensive. The
Carnegie did the same thing, chemistry and
physics and biology and geology.
And that was what we did on our first expedition to
the Gulf of California.
And this was a remarkable place. In the first
place, it was very wild. Very few people there. One
island, Tiburon Island, still had Indians on it,
living pretty much as they lived thousands of
years ago. Very, very primitive Indians. There
were a few settlements, the settlement of La Paz,
the settlement at Loreto,
half a dozen settlements altogether, small
relics of the missions or In one case, a famous
mining camp, a copper mining camp. But the most
interesting thing about the Gulf was the water.
The water just, while the shore was a desert, the
water just teemed with life. And this was because
of the very peculiar circulation. It had been
called by Cortes the Mare Vermejo, the Vermilion
Sea. The reason it was called the Vermilion Sea was
that it looked like tomato soup in the springtime.
You had an enormous plankton bloom every spring,
and literally if you went out in a small boat at
night and dipped your oars in the water, the whole
sea would light up for hundreds of yards around the
ship from luminescent organisms. And the reason
for this was that the surface water of the gulf was
blown out of the gulf by northerly winds, and deep
water came in to take its place. And deep water was
rich in nutrients. Surface water was poorer with
nutrients. So the nutrient concentration was
extremely high. And it came right up to the surface
where the plankton organisms live. The bottom
deposits, as a result,
literally almost nothing but diatoms diatoms and
other skeletons of other plankton organisms and
these were layered in bars layer after layer the
bottom in other words was anaerobic there was so
much organic matter settling to the bottom oxygen
was all used up so you got beautiful layered
sediments and the
of course the The chemistry of the water was
fascinating, and the geology was even more
fascinating, because we didn't know it then, but
this is the border
of the two tectonic plates. And you get these very
complicated trenches and ridges and troughs and
other zones of extreme tectonic activity,
because it was right in there. because it was right
on the edge of the Pacific plate and the North
American
plate. It's a continuation of the South Pacific,
the Easter Island rise, and the San Andreas Rift in
California itself. It's a place very much like the
Rift Valley in Africa and the Red Sea, which is
where the Earth is pulling apart. We didn't, of
course, know it then, but we were fascinated by it.
had a very complicated basin and range structure
of the place, and these basins each had these
anaerobic conditions in them.
And so we went back again. We got a grant from the
Geological Society of America, another grant,
and went back again to the Gulf. And at that time, it
was a purely geological expedition. Emory was on
it, and Charlie Anderson, the Geological Survey,
Fran Shepard and I, and several of our younger
people, quite a few publications came out of this
on the geology of the, not only the marine, but the
land geology of the lower California and the Gulf
of California. And the whole thing was really
exploration of a very interesting kind.
At about that time, the
war started in Europe in 1939. It started the
summer or the fall of the year that 1939, there was
another meeting of the International Union of
Geology and Geophysics in Washington. It was a
very sad meeting because the war had started. All
these people from Europe that I told you about
before were there at that meeting, too. Many of
them we never saw again. And we here at Scripps were
getting interested in underwater sound. There
was a naval officer named Ross Bennett,
R-A-W-S-O-N-E-N-N-E-T-T,
two T's, who was the operations officer or
technical officer of a division of destroyers
here which were testing sonar here. The head of the
skipper of this division was a man named Berhans,
who later became an admiral. They both became
admirals. And they were really testing, trying to
understand what happened in the ocean to affect
the performance of sonar here. what we used to call
underwater sound gear in those days. And Ross and
Bennett came out to Scripps and talked to
Sparadrip and Dick Fleming and me, and we
developed a theory of what was, of the propagation
of sound in seawater, a ray theory, a very simple
theory. Essentially, ray optics. At the same time
that Ewing and Islam were doing it, it was all quite
unknown to us. And then later, the summer of 1941, I
went into the Navy. Can't change that thing again.